---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Meta is a crutch
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2018-30-08
labels:
  - Meta
  - Essays
  - Recursion
---

What does defeat look like to you?

To some, defeat would be giving up. Turning in nothing. Abandoning a goal. But to me, defeat looks different. Defeat can be attractive. Defeat can be an easy out. Defeat is meta commentary.

It's hard to be creative. Harder still to be asked to be creative and be expected to produce creativity. Sometimes, when I'm asked to be creative, I find myself being the least creative I've ever been. When asked to write an essay for example, I can't think of something that happened last week, or what I ate for breakfast, or the dreams I have in life. All of that eludes me, so I look around. "I can write about this pen," I think to myself. "Or this book. This desk. This computer." But none of it inspires me. So then it hits: "I'll write about this essay". It, after all, is the one thing I'm thinking about. And to some it comes across as clever or inspired. "He's subverting the narrative!" They'll say. "Testing what it means to write an essay altogether!" But that's a load of bunk. The truth is, I've taken the easy way out. Rather than write about something interesting or creative, I'm writing about the least creative thing I can possibly focus on: the thing directly in front of me.

I see it all the time in the world around me. Games designed about programming. Comics designed about writer's block. Art designed about the act of painting. And maybe, to some, that's the penultimate piece. A piece about the construction of the piece itself. But when I see those pieces, I see what I see in myself. A laziness, an uncreativity. An entirely selfish piece of work. And it irks me. It shows to me that the artist creating the piece cannot communicate in a way that can be understood by the world around him. It tells me that, instead of creating a statement about life and human nature, they'd rather create a very easy statement about their practice that can be understood by the peers of their practice. This, as I see it, was the pitfall that consumed modern art. Art which used to appeal to the public, now seems to only appeal to artists. The creativity well runs dry, and when presented with a canvas to draw about the world they instead draw about the canvas.

"Now hold on a minute", you might be thinking. "If the practice bothers you so much, why are you doing it now? Aren't you speaking hypocritically in your complaints, if you're committing these affronts yourself?" And to that I'd say, yes, and no. Yes, I'm writing from a meta perspective. But no, I've not taken the easy way out. The simple thing to do would have been to write about the act of writing. The words flowing across the page, the ideas flowing into reality, but I've chosen not to do that here. Rather, I've chosen to write about the act of subverting the need to write by writing about writing itself. And if that sounded confusing to you, it gets worse. Just there I've written about my choice to write about the act of subverting the need to write by writing about writing itself. And again: Now I've written about my sentence in which I wrote about my choice to write about the act of subverting the need to write by writing about writing itself. I can keep going, too, recursively expressing my statement on a statement ad infinitum. It's fun to me.

I chose this topic not out of uncreativity or lack of inspiration, but rather to call out this issue in myself. To bring this trend to light and have a little fun with it. Meta work is fun and subversion is welcome, but drawing a canvas and calling it art is a practice I see as lazy and boring. It fails to make an interesting statement anyone can understand, and rather just makes a statement about the practice itself. Something relatable to the artist's fellow creators.

So I'd rather not put it so high up on the pedestals like we do. Keep your canvases on the canvases, and keep your art loose & understandable.

----

This essay was developed for ICS 314 on 8/30/2018
